index.md, before:

---
title: Bachelor Course on Functional Programming
---

Please contact <a href="mailto:F.Staals@uu.nl">Frank Staals</a> or <a
href="mailto:m.i.l.vakar@uu.nl">Matthijs Vákár</a> for any enquiry
about the course, mentioning [INFOFP] in the title.

### Teaching Objectives

By the end of the course you will be able to

* solve problems using a 'functional approach'. That is, define *what*
  needs to be computed using techniques and concepts such as
    - recursion,
    - pattern matching,
    - composition,
    - higher order functions,
    - algebraic data types,
    - monads,
    - immutable and persistent data structures, and
    - laziness.
* reason about the correctness and the types of functions.
* develop a small, real world game in the functional language Haskell.

### Latest news

#### *2019-09-05* : GHC Instalation Instructions

  Jip, one of our TAs', has written detailed instructions on how he
  set up his windows machine for Haskell development. You can find his
  guide [here](practicals/windows_instructions.pdf).

  For OS X (High Sierra or newer)
  [these](https://medium.com/@dogwith1eye/setting-up-haskell-in-vs-code-on-macos-d2cc1ce9f60a)
  detailed instructions on how to set up your system may be useful.

Commit message:

Added video exercise to website index

index.md, after:

---
title: Bachelor Course on Functional Programming
---

Please contact <a href="mailto:F.Staals@uu.nl">Frank Staals</a> or <a
href="mailto:m.i.l.vakar@uu.nl">Matthijs Vákár</a> for any enquiry
about the course, mentioning [INFOFP] in the title.

### Teaching Objectives

By the end of the course you will be able to

* solve problems using a 'functional approach'. That is, define *what*
  needs to be computed using techniques and concepts such as
    - recursion,
    - pattern matching,
    - composition,
    - higher order functions,
    - algebraic data types,
    - monads,
    - immutable and persistent data structures, and
    - laziness.
* reason about the correctness and the types of functions.
* develop a small, real world game in the functional language Haskell.

### Latest news

#### *2019-09-20* : Optional Bonus Assignment

  To receive extra credit (see Description/Grading for precise grading scheme)
  we encourage you to work in pairs to make a 5-minute video about a Haskell package or language
  extension. The point of the video will be to explain the purpose of the package/extension as well
  as to give examples of how to use it. The video should be able to serve as a how-to guide
  for others getting started with Haskell. You can think of the target audience as your co-students. 
  
  You can find an overview of Haskell packages on <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/">Hackage</a>
  and of language extensions in <a href="https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/lang.html"> the GHC documentation</a>.

  If you have a package or extension in mind that you would like to
  make a video about, please contact <a href="mailto:F.Staals@uu.nl">Frank Staals</a>
  or <a href="mailto:m.i.l.vakar@uu.nl">Matthijs Vákár</a> to ensure that the choice is 
  appropriate.

#### *2019-09-05* : GHC Instalation Instructions

  Jip, one of our TAs', has written detailed instructions on how he
  set up his windows machine for Haskell development. You can find his
  guide [here](practicals/windows_instructions.pdf).

  For OS X (High Sierra or newer)
  [these](https://medium.com/@dogwith1eye/setting-up-haskell-in-vs-code-on-macos-d2cc1ce9f60a)
  detailed instructions on how to set up your system may be useful.
