optional.md, before:

---
title: Optional assignment
---

The optional assignment consists of the description of another functional language, a [library in Hackage](http://hackage.haskell.org/), or [language extension from GHC](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/lang.html) in several forms. The work can be shared by a group of at most 3 students, and adds up to 0.5 points to the final grade.

More precisely, this description has to show what can be achieved with that library or language extension, and put it in relation with elements seen during the course. There are three elements which compose this work:

1. A document of around 3 to 5 pages with an introduction and textual description.
2. A piece of code, preferrably a Cabal project, where the library or extension is used.
3. During the last day of the course a 10-minute presentation must be given by one of the components of the group.

If you are interested in working on this optional assignment, please write me an [e-mail](mailto:A.SerranoMena@uu.nl) with the names and Solis identifiers of the entire group **before 12 October**. Please also include one or several topics you would like to work on. Please then wait until you receive confirmation of the topic you need to write about.

### List of topics

The following topics are provided as a suggestion, but many other are possible.

#### Other functional languages

* <a href="https://ucsd-progsys.github.io/liquidhaskell-blog/">LiquidHaskell</a>: check more properties in your types
* <a href="https://www.idris-lang.org/">Idris</a>: extends Haskell with dependent types
* <a href="https://v1.realworldocaml.org/v1/en/html/index.html">OCaml</a>: strict and non-pure, as opposed to Haskell

#### Language extensions

* <a href="https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#generalised-algebraic-data-types-gadts">Generalised ADTs</a>
* <a href="https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#multi-parameter-type-classes">Multi-parameter type classes</a>
* <a href="https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#pattern-synonyms">Pattern synonyms</a>
* <a href="https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#parallel-list-comprehensions">Extensions to list comprehensions</a>

#### Structures

* <a href="https://www.schoolofhaskell.com/school/to-infinity-and-beyond/pick-of-the-week/profunctors">Contravariant functors and bifunctors</a>
* <a href="https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2500613">Semirings</a>
* <a href="https://www.haskell.org/arrows/">Arrows</a>

#### Libraries

* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/foldl"><tt>foldl</tt></a>: composable folds
* <a href="https://www.spock.li/"><tt>Spock</tt></a>: HTTP server
* <a href="http://haskell-servant.readthedocs.io/en/stable/"><tt>servant</tt></a>: HTTP server
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/aeson"><tt>aeson</tt></a>: JSON serialization
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/logict"><tt>logict</tt></a>: logic programming
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/regex-applicative"><tt>regex-applicative</tt></a>: regular rexpressions
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/errors"><tt>errors</tt></a>: error handling
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/monad-par"><tt>monad-par</tt></a>: parallel programming
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/persistent"><tt>persistent</tt></a>: database access

Commit message:

Updating slides, adding practical, updated optional assignment

optional.md, after:

---
title: Optional assignment
---

To receive extra credit (see Description/Grading for precise grading
scheme) we encourage you to work in pairs to make a 5-minute video
about a Haskell package or language extension. The point of the video
will be to explain the purpose of the package/extension as well as to
give examples of how to use it. The video should be able to serve as a
how-to guide for others getting started with Haskell. You can think of
the target audience as your co-students.

You can find an overview of Haskell packages on <a
href="http://hackage.haskell.org/">Hackage</a> and of language
extensions in <a
href="https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/lang.html">
the GHC documentation</a>.

If you have a package or extension in mind that you would like to make
a video about, please contact <a href="mailto:F.Staals@uu.nl">Frank
Staals</a> or <a href="mailto:m.i.l.vakar@uu.nl">Matthijs Vákár</a>
**before 12 October 2019** to ensure that the choice is appropriate.

### List of topics

The following topics are provided as a suggestion, but many other are possible.

#### Language extensions

* <a href="https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#generalised-algebraic-data-types-gadts">Generalised ADTs</a>
* <a href="https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#multi-parameter-type-classes">Multi-parameter type classes</a>
* <a href="https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#pattern-synonyms">Pattern synonyms</a>
* <a href="https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#parallel-list-comprehensions">Extensions to list comprehensions</a>

#### Structures

* <a href="https://www.schoolofhaskell.com/school/to-infinity-and-beyond/pick-of-the-week/profunctors">Contravariant functors and bifunctors</a>
* <a href="https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2500613">Semirings</a>
* <a href="https://www.haskell.org/arrows/">Arrows</a>

#### Libraries

* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/foldl"><tt>foldl</tt></a>: composable folds
* <a href="https://www.spock.li/"><tt>Spock</tt></a>: HTTP server
* <a href="http://haskell-servant.readthedocs.io/en/stable/"><tt>servant</tt></a>: HTTP server
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/aeson"><tt>aeson</tt></a>: JSON serialization
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/logict"><tt>logict</tt></a>: logic programming
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/regex-applicative"><tt>regex-applicative</tt></a>: regular rexpressions
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/errors"><tt>errors</tt></a>: error handling
* <a href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/monad-par"><tt>monad-par</tt></a>: parallel programming
* <a
  href="http://hackage.haskell.org/package/persistent"><tt>persistent</tt></a>: database access
